# A Bit of Background on Linux

## Where is Linux Used?
It's fair to say that Linux is a lot more intimidating to approach than Operating Systems (OSs) such as Windows. Both variants have their own advantages and disadvantages. For example, Linux is considerably much more lightweight and you'd be surprised to know that there's a good chance you've used Linux in some form or another every day! Linux powers things such as:
- Websites that you visit
- Car entertainment/control panels
- Point of Sale (POS) systems such as checkout tills and registers in shops
- Critical infrastructures such as traffic light controllers or industrial sensors

## Flavours of Linux
The name "Linux" is actually an umbrella term for multiple OSs that are based on UNIX (another operating system). Thanks to Linux being open-source, variants of Linux come in all shapes and sizes - suited best for what the system is being used for.

For example, Ubuntu & Debian are some of the more commonplace distributions of Linux because it is so extensible. You can run Ubuntu as a server (such as websites & web applications) or as a fully-fledged desktop.

## Running Your First Few Commands
As we previously discussed, a large selling point of using OSs such as Ubuntu is how lightweight they can be. This, of course, doesn't come without its disadvantages, where for example, often there is no GUI (Graphical User Interface) or what is also known as a desktop environment that we can use to interact with the machine (unless it has been installed). A large part of interacting with these systems is using the "Terminal".

The "Terminal" is purely text-based and is intimidating at first. However, if we break down some of the commands, after some time, you quickly become familiar with using the terminal!

`~$ enter commands here`


We need to be able to do basic functions like navigate to files, output their contents, and make files! The commands to do so are self-explanatory (once you know what they are of course...)

Let's get started with two of the first commands which I have broken down in the table below:

| Command  | Description                         |
|----------|-------------------------------------|
| `echo`   | Output any text that we provide     |
| `whoami` | Find out what user we're currently logged in as! |

## Interacting With the Filesystem!
So far we've only covered the "echo" and "whoami" commands. Not all that useful when you consider things that we need to do - including navigating the filesystem, reading and writing to it as well.

We're going to be learning the commands so that we can do just that. Just like the previous task, I'll display the commands in the table in the next heading & show examples of these commands being used.

### Interacting With the Filesystem
As I previously stated, being able to navigate the machine that you are logged into without relying on a desktop environment is pretty important. After all, what's the point of logging in if we can't go anywhere?

| Command | Full Name       |
|---------|-----------------|
| `ls`    | listing         |
| `cd`    | change directory|
| `cat`   | concatenate     |
| `pwd`   | print working directory |

#### Listing Files in Our Current Directory (`ls`)

```
~$ ls
'Important Files' 'My Documents' Notes Pictures
```

We can see there are the following directories/folders:
- Important Files
- My Documents
- Notes
- Pictures

**Pro tip**: You can list the contents of a directory without having to navigate to it by using `ls` and the name of the directory. I.e. `ls Pictures`.

#### Changing Our Current Directory (`cd`)

Now that we know what folders exist, we need to use the "cd" command (short for change directory) to change to that directory. Say if I wanted to open the "Pictures" directory - I'd do `cd Pictures`. Where again, we want to find out the contents of this "Pictures" directory and to do so, we'd use `ls` again:

```
~/Pictures$ ls
dog_picture1.jpg dog_picture2.jpg dog_picture3.jpg dog_picture4.jpg
```

In this case, it looks like there are 4 pictures of dogs!

#### Outputting the Contents of a File (`cat`)
Whilst knowing about the existence of files is great — it's not all that useful unless we're able to view the contents of them.

We will come on to discuss some of the tools available to us that allow us to transfer files from one machine to another in a later room. But for now, we're going to talk about simply seeing the contents of text files using a command called "cat".

"Cat" is short for concatenating & is a fantastic way for us to output the contents of files (not just text files!).

In the screenshot below, you can see how I have combined the use of "ls" to list the files within a directory called "Documents":

```
~/Documents$ ls
todo.txt
~/Documents$ cat todo.txt
Here's something important for me to do later!
```


We've applied some knowledge from earlier in this task to do the following:
1. Used "ls" to let us know what files are available in the "Documents" folder of this machine. In this case, it is called "todo.txt".
2. We have then used `cat todo.txt` to concatenate/output the contents of this "todo.txt" file, where the contents are "Here's something important for me to do later!"

**Pro tip**: You can use `cat` to output the contents of a file within directories without having to navigate to it by using `cat` and the name of the directory. I.e. `cat /home/ubuntu/Documents/todo.txt`.

Sometimes things like usernames, passwords (yes - really...), flags, or configuration settings are stored within files where `cat` can be used to retrieve these.

#### Finding out the full Path to our Current Working Directory (`pwd`)

You'll notice as you progress through navigating your Linux machine, the name of the directory that you are currently working in will be listed in your terminal.

It's easy to lose track of where we are on the filesystem exactly, which is why I want to introduce "pwd". This stands for print working directory.

Using the example machine from before, we are currently in the "Documents" folder — but where is this exactly on the Linux machine's filesystem? We can find this out using this "pwd" command like within the screenshot below:

```
~/Documents$ pwd
/home/ubuntu/Documents
~/Documents$
```

Let's break this down:
1. We already know we're in "Documents" thanks to our terminal, but at this point in time, we have no idea where "Documents" is stored so that we can get back to it easily in the future.
2. I have used the "pwd" (print working directory) command to find the full file path of this "Documents" folder.
3. We're helpfully told by Linux that this "Documents" directory is stored at "/home/ubuntu/Documents" on the machine — great to know!
4. Now in the future, if we find ourselves in a different location, we can just use `cd /home/ubuntu/Documents` to change our working directory to this "Documents" directory.

## Searching for Files
Although it doesn't seem like it so far, one of the redeeming features of Linux is truly how efficient you can be with it. With that said, you can only be as efficient as you are familiar with it of course. As you interact with OSs such as Ubuntu over time, essential commands like those we've already covered will start to become muscle-memory.

One fantastic way to show just how efficient you can be with systems like this is using a set of commands to quickly search for files across the entire system that our user has access to. No need to consistently use `cd` and `ls` to find out what is where. Instead, we can use commands such as `find` to automate things like this for us!

This is where Linux starts to become a bit more intimidating to approach -- but we'll break this down and ease you into it.

### Using `Find`
The `find` command is fantastic in the sense that it can be used both very simply or rather complex depending upon what it is you want to do exactly. However, let's stick to the fundamentals first.

Take the snippet below; we can see a list of directories available to us:

```
~$ ls
Desktop Documents Pictures folder1
~$
```


1. Desktop
2. Documents
3. Pictures
4. folder1

Now, of course, directories can contain even more directories within themselves. It becomes a headache when we're having to look through every single one just to try and look for specific files. We can use `find` to do just this for us!

Let's start simple and assume that we already know the name of the file we're looking for — but can't remember where it is exactly! In this case, we're looking for *"passwords.txt"*.

If we remember the filename, we can simply use `find -name passwords.txt` where the command will look through every folder in our current directory for that specific file like so:

```
~$ find -name passwords.txt
./folder1/passwords.txt
~$
```

"Find" has managed to find the file — it turns out it is located in folder1/passwords.txt — sweet. But let's say that we don't know the name of the file, or want to search for every file that has an extension such as ".txt". `Find` let's us do that too!

We can simply use what's known as a wildcard (`*`) to search for anything that has `.txt` at the end. In our case, we want to find every `.txt` file that's in our current directory. We will construct a command such as `find -name *.txt`. Where "Find" has been able to find every `.txt` file and has then given us the location of each one:

```
~$ find -name *.txt
./folder1/passwords.txt
./Documents/todo.txt
~$
```


`Find` has managed to find:
1. "passwords.txt" located within "folder1"
2. "todo.txt" located within "Documents"

### Using `Grep`
Another great utility that is a great one to learn about is the use of `grep`. The `grep` command allows us to search the contents of files for specific values that we are looking for.

Take for example, the access log of a web server. In this case, the `access.log` of a web server has 244 entries:

```
~$ wc -l access.log
244 access.log
~$
```

Using a command like `cat` isn't going to cut it too well here. Let's say for example if we wanted to search this log file to see the things that a certain user/IP address visited? Looking through 244 entries isn't all that efficient considering we want to find a specific value.

We can use `grep` to search the entire contents of this file for any entries of the value that we are searching for. Going with the example of a web server's access log, we want to see everything that the IP address "81.143.211.90" has visited (note that this is fictional):

```
~$ grep "81.143.211.90" access.log
81.143.211.90 - - [25/Mar/2021:11:17 + 0000] "GET / HTTP/1.1" 200 417 "-" "Mozilla/5.0 (Linux; Android 7.0; Moto G(4))"
~$
```

`Grep` has searched through this file and has shown us any entries of what we've provided and that is contained within this log file for the IP.

## An Introduction to Shell Operations
Linux operators are a fantastic way to power up your knowledge of working with Linux. There are a few important operators that are worth noting. We'll cover the basics and break them down accordingly to bite-sized chunks. At an overview, I'm going to be showcasing the following operators:

| Symbol/operators | Description                                                        |
|------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `&`              | This operator allows you to run commands in the background of your terminal |
| `&&`             | This operator allows you to combine multiple commands together in one line of your terminal |
| `>`              | This operator is a redirector - meaning that we can take the output from a command (such as using `cat` to output a file) and direct it elsewhere |
| `>>`             | This operator does the same function as `>` but appends the output rather than replacing (meaning nothing is overwritten) |

### Operator `&`
This operator allows us to execute commands in the background. For example, let's say we want to copy a large file. This will obviously take quite a long time and will leave us unable to do anything else until the file successfully copies. The "&" shell operator allows us to execute a command and have it run in the background (such as this file copy) allowing us to do other things!

### Operator `&&`
This shell operator is a bit misleading in the sense of how familiar it is to its partner `&`. Unlike the `&` operator, we can use `&&` to make a list of commands to run for example `command1 && command2`. However, it's worth noting that `command2` will only run if `command1` was successful.

### Operator `>`
This operator is what's known as an output redirector. What this essentially means is that we take the output from a command we run and send that output to somewhere else.

A great example of this is redirecting the output of the `echo` command that we learned. Of course, running something such as `echo howdy` will return "howdy" back to our terminal — that isn't super useful. What we can do instead, is redirect "howdy" to something such as a new file!

Let's say we wanted to create a file named "welcome" with the message "hey". We can run `echo hey > welcome` where we want the file created with the contents "hey" like so:

```
~$ echo hey > welcome
~$ cat welcome
hey
```


**Note**: If the file "welcome" already exists, the contents will be overwritten!

### Operator `>>`
This operator is also an output redirector like in the previous operator (`>`) we discussed. However, what makes this operator different is that rather than overwriting any contents within a file, for example, it instead just puts the output at the end.

Following on with our previous example where we have the file "welcome" that has the contents of "hey". If we were to use echo to add "hello" to the file using the `>` operator, the file will now only have "hello" and not "hey".

The `>>` operator allows us to append the output to the bottom of the file — rather than replacing the contents like so:

```
~$ echo hello >> welcome
~$ cat welcome
hey
hello
```

